Some of them, they just take it, give everything
they had up. They're going off. You want to send it
up? They see it is going, sure enough, they beg you
to stay, you know, another year. Get anything you
want, any kind of money. But now you're going to
stay there next year because your crop ain't going
to occur, you know. It's not going to occur. You let
your stand. And feed you to the hives. Now have
children like this girl here, this any kind of
dress she wore, they let you take it up. But now when
the crop come, they'll take a little bit of that
crop. You wouldn't have nothing to live on next
year until next year come. Well, that old McCown
was right there for Christmas, you know, get just
what you wanted. That's what they do in places over
there. But there was sure fine white folks over
there. Before you'd wake up, I had one round over
there. And that was about some Johnson graves.
What was that? You know, Johnson grass after a
flood, you know, just seeds washed all over the
field. Well, next year, they'd come up just
digging that. That's why I wouldn't want you to cut
it up. You want to go over the field and pull it up.
It's all over the field. Pull it up every spread,
you know. It comes up, you know, like shovel. And
pull it up. And I wouldn't pull it up. I'd go across
the field digging up like... And he wanted me to
pull a root and oil up, you know. He told me I was too
old for that. I couldn't do it. He said, well, if you
can't pull this up, when you get this crop off,
you'll leave. Leave my place. I said, thank you,
sir. Well, everybody got the crop, you know, made a
good crop that year. Got the crop, he went on to see
his wife. And his wife come down there one day and
says, Laura, said, ma'am, can you take me to leave?
I said, yes, and this time I get this crop out, I'm
going to leave, too. Said Mr. Payne was drunk, I
wouldn't leave. I said, yes ma'am, I'm going to
leave. I'll leave this place. I said, Mr. Payne,
come in the field sometime. You wouldn't be with
him. Jump on me, kill me. Beat me to death. I said, oh
no, she said, I wouldn't leave. But see, I done got
scared then, you know. He told me to leave. And I'd
been there then. I'd been on his place in 16 years.
And it's the first time he ever told me to leave, you
know. And I just got scared, you know. And I left
now. I left in the house. Sometimes those
landlords would whip them, they say. He'd fight
them. He'd fight the hands. He would? Yes. They
wouldn't let him whip them. They'd fight him. He
wouldn't try to hurt none of them, but he'd jump
down on his horse to fight them, you know. And the
hands would fight him. The men would fight him. And
he sure was a good old white man, though. And he'd go
to the house on his horse to get a gun, get a gun at
him. And he'd ride right in the field and come back
with his gun, you know, right up ahead of us. Well,
Albert followed me a while ago, so-and-so
followed me a while ago, and I'm going back killing
him. I wouldn't do that. I wouldn't have it in the
name of killing my hands on the place. I wouldn't
have it to say I hurt none of my hands on the place and
they stayed there. And you don't have no trouble
with that. Yes, that's so. All right, God, do it
again. I'm going to kill him. We'll be sure to go to
the white man. We jumped once. We was in the wagon.
We jumped once. Got his gun. Could have did it. Got
his gun and shoot in the wagon with me and my
children. And his wife hanging to the Winchester
by the door. Who was he going to shoot at? They were
going to shoot in the wagon at us. Said, my boy, you
know, put the dog on his dog. You know how dogs is?
You go across by the road. Said, put it on his dog.
You got to shoot at him. And she hanging to him.
Said, don't you shoot that rag. You kill all of them
children. I'll kill all of them. One dog jump on my
dog. And this time, she got the gun away from him.
Went right back and laid down there. Said, no,
don't worry. He was just that. She wants to have
time handling him. Yes. He was good. They were good
people. But here's fractures, whoop, here's
fractures.
If you brought out a load of corn, first and
foremost, you know, if you brought out a load of
corn, and if it wasn't just level, you'd be not
bringing that load out all level, you'd have to
take some off that corn, first and foremost, so
it'd give you the little one. Like you said, Mr.
Payne, there's your corn. Oh, sir, I don't want it.
I don't want it. That corn ain't full load. I don't
want it. He wouldn't have it near. No sir. But he was
sure good folks. But he sure was fractious. He was
too fractious. But he was good people. And
therefore he'd better round than drink him. That
way his wife wouldn't stay at the house and he'd
come to the field. He'd have come with him. Because
you know she's going to have a round with some of the
colored folks. Is that right? Yes. Right down
there in that bottom, too. Around with the
colorful. And she'd come along with him. She'd
come along with him every time. If he walked, she'd
walk with him. If he ran in a wagon, anything, she'd
come, too. Oh, he was so mean. He'd fracture that
away when he got drinking. Did he ever try to whip
any of them with a whip? No, he never tried to whip
them with no whip, nothing like that. But he'd jump
right down, be plowing. He's more out of his
half-hands than anybody else. Be plowing, you
know, and they wouldn't talk to suit him. He'd jump
right down by the plow with no way to move. He'd go in
off and don't commit to knocking him, you know. And
they couldn't commit to knocking him, touching
him, too. But anything after he'd fight one of
them, they'd fight him, too. Fight one of them, and
he'd go out to the house and come to the lock. See,
they're just as good, you know. Just as good, you
know. He said, well, Sandy come. Let's go to town
and drink it off. Let's go to town, boy, and drink it
off. They had it wrong with them then all that week.
He was good for them. They'd go to town. But he let
them go to church any time they wanted to? Yeah, so
they went to church. He didn't bother about no
church, nothing like that. He had a church right
there on his place. Right there on his place. He
must have had a lot of hands working for him. He had a
big plantation. I think he had 700 acres. He had
them. He had 14 houses on the page. They were there
to call a page, please. He never bothered. One
white man tried to project a church, and that was
Mr. Morton. He tried to project a colorful church.
Why? He didn't want them to have a church on the
page, you know. He didn't want them to have it.
Now, you ask me any words you want to ask about the
exclave, you know, back, and I can remember. Well,
ain't had about how old are you? Well, I don't know,
Mr. Elkwood. We don't know my age, only by the
children telling us. My mom died, and she didn't
know nothing about our age. But the children
traced back from the exclave up to now. Well, how
old were you when you were... Well, I was about 13
years old at the breakup. Uh-huh. And you remember
slavery days very well? Of course, I remember all
our white folks and all the names of them, all the
children. Called every one of the children's
names. Who did you belong to? Jim Brunson, the baby
boy. Where was that? Where did he live? Back out
here in Haines County. How many slaves did he have?
Well, he had my grandma and... And my ma, my ma was a
cook. And grandma, you know, and then they worked
in the field. And everything, I remember when she
used to plow oxen. I plowed, I plowed oxen myself.
Is that right? I can plow and lay off a corn row as
good as any man. Is that right? I used to pick
cotton. I used to pick, well, I've been here ever
since I've been here. A hundred of them picked my
500 pounds of cotton. Knock out 500 pounds. Knock
out 500 pounds of cotton. It won't cost a few. And
hunt watermelons and plum granules. Yeah. Do you
remember church times? Yes, I remember church
times. You were 20 for a time. Yes, I remember our
folks. They had power meetings from one house to
another. The colored folks. Yes. Uh-huh. The
people there. You know, the houses, you know,
would be in sections. And the house was in
different places. They'd go, and we'd have
priming. More important than good priming. And
dances, too. And dances, too? Yes. I've seen far
more dancing in the meantime. Is that a doing
slavery thing? Well, my grandma, too. My grandma
was named Rachel Proctor. Rachel Proctor. Yes,
but she belonged to the Bunnies. That's what she
meant by her husband's name. Yeah, yes, I knew his
back. Now, in slavery time, there was my sister, my
brother was slaved back. And all of them stayed
with me, one, one of the girls, and she lived in San
Antonio, Adelaide Taylor. Adelaide Taylor, so
she was your sister? Yes, she was in the young
bunch. Sister Ida, and she was the next, Brother
George, And Sister Ida and myself were slaves. And
others were born free. And all of them, we were only
two slaves. Well, I'm glad. Did you go to meetings?
Did you ever go to church? We would go to big cast,
prime meetings, you know. We used to show them to us
in the corner, you know. We used to have a good
opportunity. Is that right? Yes, they cast the
family. Well, did you go to the white folks' church
any? Yes, I went to Mountain City to the white
folks' church many times. See, the white folks
would have church in the morning, then we'd let the
colored people have church at their church in the
evening. That's your slavery. In the slave time.
In the slave time. Yes, as well. Well, what would
the preacher preach about in those days? I don't
know. I doesn't go. What does the preacher preach
about, you know? There you go. He didn't preach
like the dudes, did he? No, they weren't made to
teach, you know, and they all raised how to be, how
to get along, you know, how to treat the white
people and so on. And they used the Bible, them, you
know. Yeah, I remember all about it in slavery
time. Born there, we used to go to dances, white
folks. Well, did the white folks treat you good?
How, for the boys? Uh-huh. They was good to us. They
never hooked none of their colored people. Our
colored people, they'd take their saddle horse,
Mrs. Brown's saddle horse, big girl, Anna, and
she'd have them ride. Grandma wouldn't ride from
Mountain City to church. They had white preachers
then.
Mr. Porter, he was one of the preachers that lived
across from us. Well, would the white preachers
tell you to behave yourselves and be good to your
master? Yes, that's what they preached. We really
didn't know it was any such thing. It was God, and in
the name of God, you know, we thought that was a
different man. But he was our master, our white
folks, you know, the preachers who was the white
folks' master, and so on that way. He said, well,
that's all the better. Well, all of them would go up
by the church and ask to come to be free, you know.
They came to preach it, you know. They came to know,
you know, there was a God, and so on. Well, while you
all were slaves, did they teach you to read and
write? Did you all go to church? Nuh-uh. Nuh-uh.
They didn't know nothing about reading and
writing. All that I know, they teach you to mind
your master and your master. They sure didn't
teach you to read and write. No, they didn't. Pick
cotton, I remember, picking cotton. Well, did you
ever hear of any slaves being mistreated? Were
there any tales going around? Yes, I know of times
of mistreated people they did. I hear our folks
talking about them hooting and all. So they had to
squeeze the back, to take the clothes from the
back. Good Lord have mercy. My folks, that way. But
them business sure didn't allow them colored
people to be hooted. And they halted, they started
halted. Mr. Duncan's Saddle Horse and Ma and Pa and
Ma and Ma and the Green Horse, they rode their
horses in the saddle. Mountain City Church. And
the children stayed home. And from that on then,
from one to another, began to learn palm teaching
and amongst them. They'd have a prayer meeting,
you know, from one house to the other. You know, at
the house, like there's a house sitting here in a
section in line, you know, and people would come to
the prayer meeting. And on Sunday in the evening,
the white folks let the preacher preach, because
our folks were the dead church preachers. Well, do
you remember any of the songs they sang in those
days at churches? No. If I had the books, I could
remember and look and see. They sang the song, Are
We Born to Die? They'd sing that. Are We Born to Die?
How'd that go, you know? That's right, the
Secretary-Council we gave. Now, a little while.
Yes, yes. How did it go? Yes. They say I was born to
die. First Secretary-Council I was given. I was
living. I was sitting back. I never read much. We
children, we stayed at home, parched corn, and
played, you know. More and more of them grandmas
ride the horses and about three miles from our
home, white folks' home, where they stay, and go to
the white folks' church. I used to hear them laugh
and tell it all the time, you know. We didn't know
anything about freedom at all. It was free that I
was me and my oldest, next oldest sister, my
brother George. He was there all day, all those
days, but just two of us. Well, can you remember
when the war was going on? Of course I can. I sat on
the fence. At the time, me and Cousin Lou and Cousin
Sally and all of us, our lodge had white picket
fence right along by our house, like the road goes
along by my house. We sat on it, I stood on that
picket fence all day long seeing them soldiers
going back to San Antonio, a different place. I had
to put in their gloves and beavers. And horses
would swing and dance and fall just like that. What
are you doing? Culling soldiers. Culling
soldiers? Well, culling soldiers in droves.
That's right along by our house. Our home is a
two-story house, a white brook's home, you know.
And we stayed on the home until we bought the homes
over across the creek while we lived in Portland.
I remember a long time ago, you told me about during
the big breakup, the soldiers came by and riding
horseback. And you all were sitting on the fence,
you children. Can you remember that? Yeah. Lean
this way just a little bit and tell about it. Yes, I
knew that. I sat down all day and looked at them.
They played a few of this music, you know, this joy
in your life. And so it was, you know, and them
horses, they'd sing, you know. And them horses
duck and fall on their knees just like that. Oh,
wow. Adam Train. Yeah, Adam Train. Well, what
about this girl you told me about that one? Well,
that photo was the one that Long Miss photo, one of
our white folks in there. And she got her own ground
horse and molasses mill, feeding molasses mills.
How was that? How do you mean feeding the molasses?
Putting that cane in there for it to grind out to
make molasses. Oh, yeah. Grinding out juice, huh?
Yeah, juice. They had them wooden corks or things,
you know, master canes back then. And they'd hitch
a mule to it, wouldn't they? Yes. And he'd walk in a
circle. Yes, yes. He'd walk in a circle. Yes, have a
lever to it, you know, and go round and round.
Uh-huh. We've made molasses that way. I've made
molasses myself. You have? Well, now this girl got
her arm drowned off in molasses. Yes, feeding the
molasses mill. That was in another neighborhood.
Well, how old was she? Oh, she was a great big girl.
She was about big enough to feed the mill. About 10
or 12 years old, I think. Maybe a little older than
that. And the men would have molasses and pour it.
She made molasses for everybody in there. That
girl had that milled feet. Can't have canes, you
know, great big piles, piled up. She had to reach
down and get that and put it in between the corks.
When that grinded out, she'd pick up another
handful and put it in there. Well, did they have
good doctors for them in those days? When it ground
off her arm, what did they do? How did they get her
out? I don't know. I guess they carried her on their
own. I remember Dr. Manilow and Dr. Cavanaugh. I
remember them. Well, when the soldiers came by,
where was she? Who, Matt? Uh-huh. She was on the
other side. She lived the other side of us. She was
living, she was living with our white people. But
this road went right along by our white people's
house. I can go right to the day before I was born
there. It was cut right along by the house. They did
all day for weeks at the time. There was so many of us
traveling
going south to Silent Hill. Oh, they had the
prettiest horses you most ever saw. Well, now,
what did those girls, what did this girl, Matt, do?
Matt told her? Uh-huh. Well, she fed the mail.
Well, I mean, though, when the soldiers came by.
Why, she's on the fence by with us, looking at them.
She lived right across from us, you know, and that
was the road. Well, I thought she went off with the
soldiers. She did. She went off with the soldiers.
The soldiers come along. We're all sitting on the
fence. And I stand at the fence sitting. And a
colored soldier come along and asked her, did she
want to go with us? And she said, yes. She miles one
of them horses. Not behind him? No, it was a horse to
herself. Is that right? We could ride horses. We'd
jump on them horses. Started some time riding,
some time we learned how to do it. I could stand flat
footed on the ground and jump on the horse's side
with it. Is that right? Right, right, yeah. Well,
you were riding. Yes, all of us, all of we always
raced to ride horses. Paul had horses of his own,
chickens of his own. Well, then what happened to
Mack Porter after she and that soldier? She was on
with them. I never did see her and hit that over no
more. She was going towards San Tom. Going towards
San Tom? Yes, she was on with them. Well, what did
she do? Didn't even go tell her mama she was going or
anything? She didn't have any mother. Oh, I see.
And she'd already been freed, had she? Yes, yes.
That was the time the soldiers was going back, you
know, after the field. Mm-hmm. She'd always come
over to our house and stay with us. Well, can you
remember the times right after the big breakup
very well? Remember, were times pretty hard then?
Yes, times were hard. Our white folks weren't mean
to their colored people. It was different for
them. There were seven brothers of them. There was
Shea Bunton, John Bunton, Bob Bunton. We had one,
one, one, Kentucky Joe, so on, a whole pack of them.
Seven brothers of them, I know. Some of them lived
at Cedar Creek. More or no, the more I know. Well,
what did y'all do after the big breakup? Did y'all
leave the place? No, we stayed on the place and
rented on the half. Oh, rented on the half. All our
fight folks was dead. And the old C was, oh, the...
Breed love. I, Tom, I breed love. I breed love.
Mountain City. That's our old, old, old sale was a
place, you know. And you all rented on the house.
Rented on the house, too. We bought our home across
the creek. Oh, you bought your home. About how long
after the big breakup did y'all buy it? Oh, I didn't
buy it. We didn't buy it. Paul bought the home from
old Riley across the creek, and we stayed down
there. I used to stay with Aunt Rose and Uncle
George. They were old folks, had no children, you
know. They used to get me to come and stay with them.
And when I married, they gave me a home on the place.
Well, were they white folks? No, colored folks.
Oh, good. Well, how old were you when you married?
Well, I don't know. 17, 18 years old. Maybe that
old. I didn't know my age. Who did you marry? Jim
Smith. Jim Smith. Had he been a slave? Oh, yes. He
was a slave. After the breakup, they sent him. He
come from Blackpool and bought a home over across
the creek while we bought a home, Johnny, and our
home. His father and mother did, you know.
Well, he had been freed then, I guess, the at the
same time you had. Oh, yes, yes. They lived at
Blanco. They bought them a home over in the colony.
Riley had sold the colored people all the homes
there. I don't know. Who was Riley? A white man
named Riley lived right down the hill from us. They
sold Pete Bradley homes and Paul homes, Uncle
David homes. Oh, all of them. Well, I'm glad. And
that was right after the big break-up, was it?
About two, three years after the break-up. Huh.
And you just had a colony of... Yes, all that
colony. Where I come from, it's got homes out
there. That's Buda, they called it now. It was
nothing but woods when we bought it. They called it
Buda then? Yes. Oh, I know where Buda is. Yes, yes,
yes. Did you know Mr. Talley in those days? I think I
did know Mr. Talley. Huh. What was he? He was a
deputy sheriff, that's why. Is that right? Yes. He
was my fine man, too.
Yeah. Sure is. And you remember, can you remember
churches very well in Hatton? Were you a church
goer? No, we used to show them then when slavery
time. My mother and father, I can remember when
they went to church. Our white folks, they'd ride
to go to church in the morning, you know. And they'd
go in the evening, my grandma, to the white folks'
church. And they'd ride their horses. Well, then
when did you start going to church? Oh, yeah, I
never started going to church. We never had any
church until much after I married. Well, and you
started going, didn't you? After you got married?
How did you marry? Did you have a preacher marry
you? Of course, a white preacher married us. He
did? A white preacher married all of us girls.
There wasn't any preacher much when I married.
Well, who did you... When did you first start going
to church then? Well, we'd go to church then, and we
had church before, before it was locked. You know,
preachers didn't know anything, you know, on what
they hid. Was he a traveling preacher, or was he
just a colored preacher? Yes, just traveling, you
know, and stopping to preach. There was a haywood,
and groins, and so that was our preacher's name.
Well, what would you preach about? Can you
remember? Well, they just preached that we had a
God and a soul to be saved and so on. Did the preacher
preach today? Oh, no. They didn't know nothing.
They only read the Bible sometimes in places they
could read. No, they weren't. The priest wasn't
educated to talk. They weren't, huh? No, on the
spell. Some of them was reading right talk. No, the
spell, the letter, and so on. They were reading
right talk.
Some of them couldn't read and write at all, just
only the priests. What they could ever say, you
know. Then some of them laughed at getting older
and wiser, you know. Well, what about the songs
that they sang? That's what I'm interested in. I
didn't go much into the songs. Well, they sang
these old 100s. You know what an old 100 means?
Yeah, these old-time songs. Uh-huh. Yeah. Well,
they're lying off one, you know. It's Jesus, bear
the cross alone, and all the world will go free.
Yeah, yeah. That's the end going, I say. There's no
way of speaking to you like that. You're treated by
them. Yeah. Yes, he sang them songs. I had the
old-time books, hymn books. Well, where would you
get those books? They had them selling them. My
grandma and them bought them, you know. My husband
bought eight people. Jim Booker. Was your
husband, Henry Smith, much of a... Jim Smith? Oh,
Jim Smith. Mm-hmm. Was he a church man? Yes, he was.
What happened to him? Church man, church man, a
politic man, too. Oh, they were. Y'all voted in
those days. Yes, my husband was in it. He was run by a
high school. He was well up there. When he got
killed, the white folk was just crazy about him.
They come pretty soon. That boy that killed my
husband, I nursed him when he was a baby. How come he
didn't kill your husband? Well, he's just mean.
Just mean, you know. And they didn't like people up
to date, you know. And of course, it was just 13
months until my husband killed his brother. Stole
him. Killed his last brother. Mm-hmm. He'd been to
church. I think he went to jail that night to carry a
barrel of cotton. And this Walter Byers sat down on
the seat and the whole class of them was sitting
down talking. And when the time had come to his
cotton, they killed him. And they killed my
brother, my husband, on the way from Cedar Bay. I go
right to the spot now, and that's why he was killed
there. Shot him or killed him? Shot him. Shot him on
the way from Cedar Bay. See, we'd have a Cedar Bay at
home after we went home. Well,
what kind of politics did he do? Well, he worked for
white people when they wanted to be elected, you
know, in the state at that time. He worked amongst
the colored folks. Amongst the colored people. He
didn't speak to white folks. He couldn't get in the
house when he spoke hardly to white people. All
that sex in there. He had a good life. He had all of
them boys there. And he'd round up the votes, and
that's how come them to kill him. And when he sat the
night for a speech, people from Austin, from San
Marcos, from everywhere to be white and colored to
hear him speak. He'd go to the courthouse and speak
for
them. Well, did the colored folks not like him? No,
the colored people all went. that these white
people, this boy that killed him, who walked by, I
nursed him when he was a baby before I was ever
acquainted with my husband. Well, what I'm trying
to find out is, how come he didn't kill your
husband? Was it over politics? Oh, politics and
different things, you know. Poor white people.
Did the white folks have your husband killed, or
did... Did he just walk by and just go shoot
himself? No, my husband went to the break that day.
And on his way back from the city break,
he ran through the road and killed him. And I said,
there's something about the horse. I don't know
how that is done, but the white people, Walter
Kaiser, the name of the first one that got to him
when he was killed, they had to shoot him. They
brought the news to us. My brother and them. What'd
they do to Walter Biles? Well, you know why? That's
what he lived up in there, you know. They could tell
any kind of tale. They didn't do nothing with him.
Had him up. Put him in jail. But his brother-in-law
killed him. Is that right? Sure. They must have
been shooting a lot of folk up in those days. Poor
people, you know. Rich white people don't bother
nobody. Or poor white folks. Yeah, it was poor. And
they come out. And his brother-in-law said Lawson
killed him. Said his father moved away. He had a
good home over there. And they moved away. Said
they'd steal his life. Just like they stole Bud's
and Jim's. And his boy's life. So he left and went to
Oklahoma. His brother-in-law killed him. He
rolled up the fence that night and killed his
brother-in-law. His brother-in-law shot him
instead? Yes. His mother tried to keep him from
killing him, but he said, I ain't going to let him
kill me like he did Uncle Jim. You know, he said, him
and my boys are all raised together. Y'all must
have all been kinfolks in those days. Right. Well,
all of these things have been... Quite true. No,
they're fake.